now the United States said on Wednesday
that it had attacked 14 missiles that
were loaded and were to be fired from
Yemen and this was the fourth day of us
strikes in less than a week on
iran-backed houthi militants who've been
attacking Merchant ships in the Red Sea
now according to the US Central Command
a drone launched by the houthi rebels
had struck a us-owned vessel ship
tracking sites show that the boat then
turned back towards the SE Canal the
houthi attacks and the response from the
US follow the outbreak of fighting in
Gaza between Israel and Hamas which the
US and others classify as a terrorist
group with tensions rising in the Middle
East there are concerns that a wider
regional conflict could
develop Israeli bombs strike Han yunas
in the Gaza Strip after more than 100
days of
fighting despite claims that the war is
entering a new phase there has been
little sign of a letup in a conflict
which the Hamas run Health Ministry in
Gaza says has cost over 23,000
Palestinian lives on the Israeli side
almost 1,500 have been
lost what started with an unprecedented
terror attack on October the 7th is
quickly spilling out beyond the borders
of Israel and Gaza drawing in Israel's
traditional Ally the United States on
the one side and on the other Hamas
backer Iran recent days have seen dozens
of attacks throughout the region in
Yemen iran-backed houthi Rebels are
continuing their campaign to disrupt
International shipping
lanes that despite dozens of air strikes
from the United States and others
targeting houthi military
installations in Iraq and Syria tayron
attacked several sites including one it
claims was being used as an Israeli spy
headquarters Lebanon has also seen
several Israeli air strikes which the
Israel Defense Force says were targeting
Hamas leaders in
Hezbollah welcome to D ret as leaders
gather in Davos for the world economic
Forum US National Security adviser Jake
Sullivan warned the world was on a path
to an escalation of hostilities in the
Middle
East an escalation that could see the
bloody conflict that began on October
the 7th spreading to The Wider
region okay let's put this into
perspective with Ian lesser he's the
vice president of the German Marshall
fund of the United States which is a
nonpartisan American public policy Think
Tank and his exper includes Middle
Eastern security Affairs Ian thanks so
much for your time today before we get
into the nitty-gritty of this can I ask
you on a scale of 1 to 10 how dangerous
do you deem these current developments
in the Middle
East well probably it's good to be with
you it won't surprise you probably that
I would say
eight but we weren't at eight uh over
the last years we were at perhaps five
there was always the potential for
escalation many of the things that we're
seeing now
are actually U building on long-standing
unresolved disputes frictions violent
actions all sorts of things that existed
beforehand but they've come together now
in a very dangerous way can we focus in
on Iran's strikes on Pakistan and now
Islam abad's uh retaliation do you see a
link here to the Israel Hamas
War I actually don't necessarily see a
link except to say that Iran is now in a
mode of uh of striking out at uh various
groups around the region on its borders
uh in ways that probably are driven by
the fact that the regime simply sees
this as integral to its survival that
it's simply built into the to the sort
of operating strategy of the regime in
Teran that they should be actively uh
striking at groups working against their
interests and supporting other kinds of
crossb terrorism in many cases uh that
they see as promoting their interest and
so it's a period of particular activism
uh for Iran but also there are probably
groups looking to to take advantage of
this even inside Iran as we saw Isis
striking in Iran uh not long ago so
you're so you're saying that tan
provoking So many actors at once is
essentially it trying to show its own
strengths well I you I think you know
just like many regimes uh Iran sees the
protection of its sovereignty uh not
only that but its own regime survival is
something that is foremost in its
planning and uh you know the ability to
keep supporting these movements uh is
something that's simply built into the
structure of the regime and of course
there are now many many more um disputes
conflicts coming to the surface where
Iran is going to see some stake in
intervening and I think that's what
we've seen in Iran and in Iraq uh and
now in
Pakistan looking at the Israel Hamas War
do you think that a a resolution to this
conflict could allow things to more or
less return to to where they were or has
a wider geopolitical struggle you know
started now that will essentially
reshape the Middle
East well the crisis in Gaza obviously
Builds on a very longstanding unresolved
dispute between Palestinians in Israel
and uh that's really the underlying
issue here uh many people over decades
have tried to make progress on that
front sometimes it's looked better than
others we're at a particularly low
moment now I think if there is a
ceasefire in Gaza it certainly would
help but it's not going to resolve many
of the things that we see happening uh
it's it's not really going to change
many of these Dynamics Hezbollah and
Lebanon will still have the same
grievances with Israel Israel will still
have its same security concerns Iran
will have its own interests in the
region and you know the fear of course
is that now in a sense we're pulling on
a string and you don't really know where
this
ends and where will all of this leave
Israel do you think I mean will it now
be in a weaker diplomatic uh position in
the region might it now be forced to
make certain concessions that it had
ruled out in the past uh Palestinian
statehood for
example well most of this depends
obviously on the political equation
inside Israel and that's that's in flux
obviously uh in the wake of events um
you know Israel before the current set
of Crisis uh had been in a really a
rather strong position diplomatically in
normalization with many uh countries
that were important to Israel in the
Arab world uh that now much of it not
all of it has fallen apart um in some
ways it's not s it's surprising in a way
that given what is happening that
certain relationships have actually been
preserved in a sense with Saudi Arabia
most surprisingly um but obviously there
are others where there was an opening
including with turkey that have now uh
you know really been set back and so yes
I mean Israel does face greater
diplomatic isolation it's it's not
complete in any sense uh but it's
something that any Israeli government is
going to have to reckon with in the
coming years Ian ler vice president of
the German Marshall fund Ian thanks so
much for your time today and for your
insights good to be with
you and it's to Gaza now where a
shipment of medicine has arrived
intended for scores of Israeli hostages
being held in the territory as well as
for gaza's own desperate population the
delivery comes after Qatar and France
mediated a deal between Israel and the
militant group Hamas which is deemed a
terrorist group by many countries it's
the first agreement between Israel and
Hamas since a week-long ceasefire in
November now the Israeli president Isaac
Herzog has called Iran an evil empire
which is at the root of tensions in the
Middle East he was speaking at the world
World economic Forum in Davos
Switzerland and he said that Hamas which
many countries classify as a terrorist
group was armed and financed by Teran
Iran was using Hamas he said to derail
stability not only in the region but in
the entire world October Terror right
let's get some analysis now with Mayra
zonshine she's a senior analyst with the
international crisis group myav in the
past few days we've seen the houis and
the US exchange fire has continue
attacks on the Israeli border Iran
attack Targets in Iraq and Syria I mean
is this the region-wide war many have
been
fearing I think it's fair to say that we
are in a regional War um I you know it's
not an allout War there's degrees um and
I think where I'm standing in Israel you
know if there was an allout war with
Lebanon with kisala it would look quite
different where I'm sitting in Tel Aviv
so there's obviously it could get a lot
worse uh but as as far as Israelis are
concerned they're fighting on several
fronts and I think as far as um you know
some analysts would argue and I probably
would agree that uh in some ways the US
and Israel are now at war with Iran in
in various ways speaking about Iran
because Iran does appear to be heavily
involved whether it's with the huis in
Yemen or Hezbollah in Lebanon or
militias in Iraq and Syria what does
Iran
want right well I'm not an expert on
Iran but I can tell you that this is uh
we're seeing after October 7th kind of
the culmination of years of a buildup of
power that Iran has directly funded and
in different indirect ways has built up
as well and we're seeing it now in
action and so I think that is something
that is both directly and indirectly a
product of of Iranian strategy uh to to
build up power and project it against
Israel and the us and we're seeing it
now take effect and and that doesn't
mean that Iran is necessarily uh
directing what's happening I I think the
houis are you know somewhat autonomous
and not always Cooperative balah has its
own interests in Lebanon you know it's
while it's a very difficult and failing
state right now it's still a state um
and in you know Hamas for example the
October 7th attack it's it's quite
likely that Iran didn't know about it
even though it works into its strategy
of keeping up pressure and attacking
Israel so I think what we're seeing is a
culmination of years and years of
building up of power and strategy given
this buildup do you think that the
future of how this moves forward depends
on how the Israel Hamas War turns out or
have things now been set in motion that
are independent of the outcome of that
war it's a very good question and it's
one that I'm also grappling with but I
think it's pretty clear especially from
the short pause that we had in late
November in the Israel Gaza war that if
there was a full ceasefire uh in Gaza
that we would see a cessation of
hostilities on most most of those fronts
if not all of those fronts that doesn't
mean that those don't have their own
nature that they could you know uh
spiral out of control but I think what
we've learned since October 7th is that
the entire Regional stability of the
Middle East depends in large part on
what's happening in Israel and Palestine
and so absolutely the first thing to do
would be to immediately call for an
Implement a ceasefire here and then hope
that that would uh start to calm the
situation and deescalate across the
region and then of course you would have
turn to diplomacy How likely are we
realistically myav to get a ceasefire at
this
stage unfortunately it does not look
good uh there's even a fight within the
war cabinet in Israel and amongst the
families of the hostages who would very
much like to see a cessation of the war
right now in order to secure the release
of the hostages that's something that
they're pressuring the government on the
Prime Minister has said outright that he
refuses uh he has his own political and
domestic reasons to do that as well but
he also claims that the goal of
deteriorating destroying dismantling
whatever you want to call it of Hamas is
still something that he believes Israel
will achieve and he wants a lot of time
to do that um I think the way to get to
a ceasefire is for the US to pressure
Israel uh to agree to one and it has not
done that so far but can us pressure
actually work on Israel I mean it's the
US has been trying to pressure Israel
for a number of weeks now we've had
deliber the UN Security Council as well
but Israel continues with its operation
in Gaza in fact it is winding it down
but the operation does continue how much
influence does the US really have on
Israel the US has a lot of Leverage it
could condition its military uh weaponry
and Armament of Israel that Israel
relies on uh it could condition Aid
things that have been floated Now by
certain Progressive Democrats something
that has become quite has been quite
Taboo in the the us but is now becoming
a little bit more accepted and that
would be the leverage the US has the
power it has chosen not to use it I
think Biden has really tried to to go
along with Israel's war effort and to
try and navigate Israel into a more
strategic place but Israel clearly isn't
going in that direction and the US also
has has sided with Israel in this war so
it would require a lot of political will
and capital from the bided
Administration when they're now entering
an election year so it would be
something Biden would have to really go
all out for we'll leave it there for the
timing but thanks so much for all that
context Mayra zonshine from the
international crisis group thanks so
much thank
[Music]
you